# Iterating right along...

Over the last few blog posts we've taken the time to discuss how to create various objects within the scope of the Python data model. To reiterate, the Python data model is a set of hooks which allow developers to construct objects which interact with some of the core functionality of the Python programming language. We've previously looked at how to make use of `__call__()` in the context of decorators, and how to build `__enter__()` and `__exit__()` strategies for use in context managers.

For today's post, we're going to continue with these variations on a theme and look into building Iterators.

## Iterators and the `for` loop

Python is kind of a quirky language. It has many subtle differences that make it unique in terms of it's implementation. One of these quirks that often goes unnoticed is how the `for` loop functions within Python.

If you've ever done any programming in `C` or any C-style languages, you'll recognize that the basic `for` loop is constructed as the following:

```C
int main() {
    for (int i=0; i<10; i++) {
        printf("%d ", i);
    }
}
```

where in `C`, the ( ) syntax denotes an initialization statement, a conditional statement, and an updating statement for the loop as the scope of the loop is executed.

This mental model for the `for` loop here is essentially ubiquitous across many of the popular programming languages. However it is fundamentally incorrect when considering Python's `for` loop protocol. As an example, the Python interpreter has no issue executing the following...

```python
for x in [1, 2, 'this', 'that', 'wait we started with numbers why are we looping over strings now...']:
    print(x)
```

...even though we clearly don't have any initialization, conditional, or updating statements in this protocol.

The difference here with the Python approach harks back to a comment we made in the [previous](https://1mikegrn.github.io/blog/posts/2020_10_16/) blog post regarding Python objects. In Python, everything is an object. As such, the mental model for these `for` loops mirrors that mentality and is thus moreso of the form:

```python
for <each object x> in <an object container>:
    <each object x>
```

Where the `for` loop is iteratively calling each object `x` from a collection of objects defined in an object which is iterable.

## Custom iterables

The Python data model provides two hooks which allow us to create custom iterables that hook into the `for` loop protocol. These hooks are `__iter__()` and `__next__()`.

```python
class CountByTwos:
    def __init__(self, start, stop):
        self.start = start
        self.stop = stop

    def __iter__(self):
        return self

    def __next__(self):
        res = self.start
        if self.start >= self.stop:
            raise StopIteration
        self.start += 2
        return res
```

```python
In [1]: [x for x in CountByTwos(start=4,stop=24)]
Out[1]: [4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22]
```

The `__iter__()` method here returns the object which is the iterable (in this case, `self`). All iterable objects then contain a `__next__()` protocol, which the Python interpreter continuously calls as the loop progresses, until `__next__()` raises a `StopIteration` exception. When this exception is raised, Python exits the loop. If no `StopIteration` exception is raised, the loop will continuously iterate (which can be useful in some contexts, but that'll be for a later post).

## Example: CSV concatenation

A few days ago I came across a thread on LinkedIn asking if it was possible to use Python so to concatenate a set of CSV files into a single monolithic CSV file. As stated, each file contained a row of headers followed by subsequent columns of data. The overall structure of each file was identical - the data was simply spread out over a set of files and the goal was to agglomerate the data to a single source.

If we think about this problem for a minute, we can see that the scope of the desired protocol fits into this iterator model; we simply need to create the containers necessary for iterating over the desired container objects.

```python
with open(<new_file path>, 'w') as <new_file>:
    for <each file f> in <a file container>:
        for <each row of text> in <each file f>:
            <write row of text to new_file, w/o redundant headers>
```

```python
import os.path
import csv
import glob


class FileIterator:
    def __init__(self, file: str, header=False):
        self.file = file
        if not header:
            next(self.file)

    def __iter__(self):
        return self

    def __next__(self) -> str:
        row = self.file.readline()
        if not row:
            self.file.close()
            raise StopIteration
        return row

    @staticmethod
    def from_filepath(path: str, header: bool) -> 'FileIterator':
        return FileIterator(open(path), header)


class FileManager:
    def __init__(self, files):
        self.files = files
        self.file_manager = self._file_manager()
        self.header = True

    def __iter__(self):
        return self

    def __next__(self):
        return next(self.file_manager)

    @staticmethod
    def from_directory(file_dir: str, ext: str) -> 'FileManager':
        return FileManager(glob.glob(os.path.join(file_dir, "**"+ext)))

    def _file_manager(self) -> str:
        for f in self.files:
            for row in FileIterator.from_filepath(f, header=self.header):
                self.header = False
                yield row
            yield '\n'            

with open(r'D:\Programming\zz_sandbox\test.txt', 'w') as f:
    for row in FileManager.from_directory(
        r'D:\Programming\zz_sandbox\test_data', '.txt'
    ):
        f.write(row)
```
